Introducing dotnet full autoinstrumentation (#2208)
SumoLogic/sumologic-documentation: docs/apm/traces/get-started-transaction-tracing/opentelemetry-instrumentation/net/index.md

# .Net full auto-instrumentation vs library-instrumentation (partial auto)

It is important to understand difference between two types of instrumentations that
are available in .Net. First one, is fully automatic one that does not require
code. Second one, requires some initialization that has to be done in the code
and is called library instrumentation by opentelemetry community. It is partial
auto-instrumentation as traces are generated automatically depending on settings
provided by developer(s) during initialization phase.

> > **Note** Below description applies to v0.7.0.

Reviewer: Please add link to the repository tag for version `v0.7.0`.

> > **Note** Below description applies to v0.7.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:::note
The below description applies to v0.7.0.
:::
```

> ## How to instrument .NET application, fully automaticly (Windows)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How to instrument .NET application fully automatically (Windows)
```

OpenTelemetry .NET Automatic Instrumentation has to be installed via Powershell
module, process require administrator permissions.

```powershell
# Download the module
$module_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/v0.7.0/OpenTelemetry.DotNet.Auto.psm1"
$download_path = Join-Path $env:temp "OpenTelemetry.DotNet.Auto.psm1"
Invoke-WebRequest -Uri $module_url -OutFile $download_path -UseBasicParsing

# Import the module to use its functions
Import-Module $download_path

# Install core files (online vs offline method)
Install-OpenTelemetryCore
```

After installation, we can set service name and run application

```powershell
# Set up the instrumentation for the current PowerShell session.
# Can be done via environment variable.
Register-OpenTelemetryForCurrentSession -OTelServiceName "MyServiceDisplayName"
```

The final step is to configure the exporter endpoint, service and application name otherwise defaults will be used. In this example, the instrumentation will be configured by environment variables.

* `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL=http/protobuf` - configures OTLP exporter to use OTLP HTTP protocol

> * `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://collection-sumologic-otelcol.sumologic:55681` - environment variable configures the endpoint where telemetry data will be sent. The value of the variable points to the default Sumologic Kubernetes Collector.

Reviewer: Please use `http://collection-sumologic-otelagent.sumologic:4318`

```xml
  <system.webServer>
    <validation validateIntegratedModeConfiguration="false" />
    <modules>
      <remove name="TelemetryHttpModule" />
      <add name="TelemetryHttpModule" type="OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNet.TelemetryHttpModule, OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNet.TelemetryHttpModule" preCondition="managedHandler" />
    </modules>
  </system.webServer>
```

Second, update `applicationHost.config` which is located in located in `%SystemDrive%\Windows\system32\inetsrv\config` like below.

```xml
  <location path="" overrideMode="Allow">
    <system.webServer>
      <modules>
        <add name="TelemetryHttpModule" type="OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNet.TelemetryHttpModule, OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNet.TelemetryHttpModule" preCondition="managedHandler" />
      </modules>
    </system.webServer>
  </location>
```

The final step is to configure the exporter endpoint, service and application name otherwise defaults will be used. In this example, the instrumentation will be configured by environment variables.

* `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL=http/protobuf` - configures OTLP exporter to use OTLP HTTP protocol

> * `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://collection-sumologic-otelcol.sumologic:55681` - environment variable configures the endpoint where telemetry data will be sent. The value of the variable points to the default Sumologic Kubernetes Collector.

Reviewer: Please use `http://collection-sumologic-otelagent.sumologic:4318`

Automatic instrumentation of the .NET applications is a very easy task. The simplest way to start capturing telemetry data is to implement the solution coming from OpenTelemetry-dotNet. All the libraries shipped with the [OpenTelemetry-dotNet](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet) repository support all the officially supported versions of .NET Core (including deployments in the [Microsoft Azure Service Fabric Containers](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/service-fabric/service-fabric-containers-overview)) and .NET framework with an except for .NET Framework 3.5 SP1. See this [list of the supported libraries](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet#getting-started).

> # .Net full auto-instrumentation vs library-instrumentation (partial auto)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# .NET full auto-instrumentation vs library-instrumentation (partial auto)
```

> It is important to understand difference between two types of instrumentations that
> are available in .Net. First one, is fully automatic one that does not require
> code. Second one, requires some initialization that has to be done in the code
> and is called library instrumentation by opentelemetry community. It is partial
> auto-instrumentation as traces are generated automatically depending on settings
> provided by developer(s) during initialization phase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to understand difference between two types of instrumentations that are available in .NET. 
* **Fully automatic instrumentation** does not require code. 
* **Partially automatic instrumentation**, which is called library instrumentation by the opentelemetry community, requires some initialization in the code. It is partial auto-instrumentation as traces are generated automatically depending on settings provided by developer(s) during the initialization phase.
```

:::note
The below description applies to v0.7.0.
:::

## How to instrument a .NET application automatically (Windows)

OpenTelemetry .NET Automatic Instrumentation has to be installed via Powershell
module, process require administrator permissions.

```powershell
# Download the module
$module_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/v0.7.0/OpenTelemetry.DotNet.Auto.psm1"
$download_path = Join-Path $env:temp "OpenTelemetry.DotNet.Auto.psm1"
Invoke-WebRequest -Uri $module_url -OutFile $download_path -UseBasicParsing

# Import the module to use its functions
Import-Module $download_path

# Install core files (online vs offline method)
Install-OpenTelemetryCore
```

> After installation, we can set service name and run application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After installation, you can set the service name and run the application.
```

* `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=SERVICE_NAME` - configure the service name. Ensure the string value represents its business logic, such as "FinanceServiceCall". This will appear as a tracing service name in Sumo Logic.
* `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=application=APPLICATION_NAME` - configure the application name. This will appear as a tracing application name in Sumo Logic. Additional attributes can be added here as comma separated key=value pairs.

More extensive description of all available options can be found [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/config.md)

```powershell
# Run your application with instrumentation
.\MyNetApp.exe
```

### ASP.NET application on IIS

ASP.NET application that runs on IIS requires two additional steps.

#### Step 1. Setup IIS instrumentation

This step requires to execute following command in powerhell.

```powershell
# Setup IIS instrumentation
Register-OpenTelemetryForIIS
```

#### Step 2. Define opentelemetry modules loaded by IIS

There are two options in order to achieve the goal.

> First, update application `web.config` with following section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, update the `web.config` application with the following section.
```

Author: I had application's `web.config` in mind

```xml
  <system.webServer>
    <validation validateIntegratedModeConfiguration="false" />
    <modules>
      <remove name="TelemetryHttpModule" />
      <add name="TelemetryHttpModule" type="OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNet.TelemetryHttpModule, OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNet.TelemetryHttpModule" preCondition="managedHandler" />
    </modules>
  </system.webServer>
```

> Second, update `applicationHost.config` which is located in located in `%SystemDrive%\Windows\system32\inetsrv\config` like below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Second, update `applicationHost.config`, which is located in `%SystemDrive%\Windows\system32\inetsrv\config` like below.
```

# .Net full auto-instrumentation vs library-instrumentation (partial auto)

It is important to understand difference between two types of instrumentations that
are available in .Net. First one, is fully automatic one that does not require
code. Second one, requires some initialization that has to be done in the code
and is called library instrumentation by opentelemetry community. It is partial
auto-instrumentation as traces are generated automatically depending on settings
provided by developer(s) during initialization phase.

> ## How to instrument .NET application, fully automaticly (Windows)

Reviewer: Please mention about (for both `.net` and `iis`)
- exact version of the auto-instrumentation used in this guide
- configuration possibilities (e.g. for advanced usage add link to the official documentation matching version)
- configuration related to traces export (env vars required to export traces, please use http/protobuf as default), extra resource attributes, service name
